README.md, before:

# Extended Embedded Languages

Adds syntax highlighting to C++, Go, Javascript, TypeScript, Python,
Rust and YAML for strings containing source code. Dozens of languages
can be used within the strings such as markup languages (HTML, LaTeX),
query languages (SQL, GraphQL), data languages (JSON, YAML), shader
languages (GLSL, WSGL), scripts (Shell, Bat) and many more.

![extension_example](images/extension_usage_anim.gif)

This Visual Studio Code extension enables syntax highlighting _within_
strings that contain source code. For example, a Python script might
have strings containing SQL or HTML or Bash. This plugin will add
syntax highlighting, and additionally code folding and
language-specific editor features within those strings.

This is similar to how you can select syntax highlighting within
Markdown documents using a language specifier (e.g. ` ```py `) or
switch between HTML, Javascript, and CSS in the same HTML document.


## Features

This plugin extends the syntax highlighting of several **host**
languages in order to highlight **embedded** sub-languages within
strings.

You need to specify which language you are using within the string.
How this is done depends on the host language (see below). Once that
is done you can see and edit the embedded language just like you are
editing a standalone file using that language. For example if you are
editing SQL within a C++ document, the VSCode "Toggle Line Comment"
command will prefix lines with `--` not `//`. Code folding will use
the natural structure of the embedded language block too - collapsing
`<tags>` in an XML string, or `{` braces in a C string


---
## Host Language - C++

C++ uses _raw strings_ to specify the language.

A raw string in C++ looks like
```cpp
auto s = R"foo( ...text )foo";
```

Between the `"` and `(` an arbitrary token can be placed which we use
here to specify the language. This token needs to exist at the end of
the string as well:

![cpp_example.png](images/cpp_example.png)

---
## Host language - Javascript and TypeScript

Javascript and TypeScript template strings delimited by backticks
(e.g. `` `...text...` ``) can be multiline. This extension supports
two different ways to specify the language in a multiline template
string.

As an inline comment before the beginning of the string:
```javascript
const s = /*lang_id*/ `
code goes here
`;
```

## Host language - Powershell

Powershell uses _here-strings_ to specify the language.
(e.g. `` `@"...text..."@` ``) but must be multiline.
A here-string in Powershell looks like
```powershell
$s = @"
...text
"@
```

To specify the language, you can use a inline comment before the string:
```powershell
$s = <#lang_id#>@"
code goes here
"@
```

Or as a _tagged template_, this style expects there to be a function
with the name of the language which can process the string (see the
[tagged template
documentation](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Template_literals#tagged_templates)
for examples and for an identity template which just returns the input
string)
```javascript
const s = lang_id`
code goes here
`;
```


![js_example.png](images/js_example.png)

---
## Host language - Python

Python multiline strings do not have custom terminators the way C++,
Perl or other languages do. As such, we rely on _leading comments_ to
identify a language. This comment must be immediately after the `'''`
or `"""` which starts a multiline string

![py_example.png](images/py_example.png)


---
## Host language - YAML

YAML has block strings that begin with a `|` or `>` and continue based
on the indentation level of a block of text. Following the start
indicator you can put a comment (this is a *YAML* comment) which
indicates the language

![yaml_example.png](images/yaml_example.png)


---
## Host Language - Rust

Rust strings are all multiline. But for syntax embedding purposes we
use the multiline raw strings that begin with `r#"` (where there are
0-n `#` characters) and end with `"#`

![rust_example.png](images/rust_example.png)

---
## Host Language - Go

All Go strings are multi-line, but this extension uses _raw strings_
for code blocks. These are strings that are surrounded by backticks
and can contain quote and backslash characters without the need for
escaping them (they can not, however, easily contain backticks). These
strings must be prefixed with an inline comment indicating the
language ID

![go_example.png](images/go_example.png)

---
## Embedded Languages

This extension supports a large number of embedded languages, listed
below. The "ID" column shows the IDs you can use in host languages
like C++ and YAML where you can specify an ID in the _host_ language.
The "Comment" column is for host languages like Python which have no
way to indicate the embedded language type directly, and shows what
the first characters of the _embedded_ language string needs to be to
signal which language you are using.

| Name                   | ID                           | Comment                                        |
| ---------------------- | ---------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------- |
| ARM assembly           | arm                          | `@arm`,`;arm`                                  |
| Batch                  | bat                          | `REM`, `@REM`, `::bat`                         |
| C                      | c                            | `/*c*/`                                        |
| C++                    | cpp, c++                     | `//cpp`, `//c++`                               |
| CSS                    | css                          | `/*css*/`                                      |
| GLSL                   | glsl                         | `//glsl`                                       |
| GraphQL                | graphql, gql                 | `#graphql`, `#gql`                             |
| Graphviz               | graphviz, dot                | `//graphviz`, `//dot`                          |
| Handlebars             | handlebars, hbs              | `//handlebars`, `//hbs`                        |
| HLSL                   | hlsl                         | `//hlsl`                                       |
| HTML                   | html                         | `<!DOCTYPE`, `<html`, `<!--html`               |
| Ini                    | ini                          | `;ini`                                         |
| Javascript             | js, javascript               | `//js`                                         |
| JSON                   | json                         | [^1]                                           |
| JSONC                  | jsonc                        | `//jsonc`                                      |
| LaTeX                  | latex                        | `%latex`                                       |
| Lua                    | lua                          | `--lua`                                        |
| Makefile               | makefile, make               | `#make`, `#makefile`, `#!/usr/bin/make`        |
| Metal shading language | metal                        | `//metal`                                      |
| Python                 | py, python                   | `#py`                                          |
| Shell                  | sh, bash, shell, shellscript | `#sh`, `#bash`, `#shell`, <br>`#!/bin/sh`, ... |
| SQL                    | sql                          | `--sql`                                        |
| TeX                    | text                         | `%tex`                                         |
| TOML                   | toml                         | `#toml`                                        |
| TypeScript             | typescript, ts               | `//typescript`, `//ts`                         |
| WGSL                   | wgsl                         | `//wgsl`                                       |
| x86 and x64 assembly   | x64, x86_64, x64             | `;x86`, `;x86_64`, `;x64`                      |
| XML                    | xml                          | `<?xml`, `<? xml`, `<!--xml`                   |
| YAML                   | yaml                         | `#yaml`                                        |


[^1]: JSON does not support comments, so there is no way to indicate a
  string is a JSON document within the string.

## Developer Notes

See CONTRIBUTING.md for adding new languages



## Requirements



## Known Issues

* Syntax highlighting can leak past the end of the string when there
are unclosed blocks (for example a `{` without a matching `}`). This
is a limitation of the TextMate grammars that VSCode uses - when an
_embedded_ syntax highlighter scans for the end of a text section it
can scan past the end of the string. [VSCode issue
20488](https://github.com/microsoft/vscode/issues/20488) has a longer
discussion on what is going on.

* Because of this same issue, some languages can't be embedded due to
  how they are defined. For example the most popular `csv` and
  `mermaid` highlighters will continue past the end of the string when
  they are embedded.

## Release Notes

See CHANGELOG.md for full list of changes

Commit message:

Updated the capture regexes and some documentation
Added an example image for powershell

README.md, after:

# Extended Embedded Languages

Adds syntax highlighting to C++, Go, Javascript, TypeScript, Python,
Rust, PowerShell and YAML for strings containing source code. Dozens
of languages can be used within the strings such as markup languages
(HTML, LaTeX), query languages (SQL, GraphQL), data languages (JSON,
YAML), shader languages (GLSL, WSGL), scripts (Shell, Bat) and many
more.

![extension_example](images/extension_usage_anim.gif)

This Visual Studio Code extension enables syntax highlighting _within_
strings that contain source code. For example, a Python script might
have strings containing SQL or HTML or Bash. This plugin will add
syntax highlighting, and additionally code folding and
language-specific editor features within those strings.

This is similar to how you can select syntax highlighting within
Markdown documents using a language specifier (e.g. ` ```py `) or
switch between HTML, Javascript, and CSS in the same HTML document.


## Features

This plugin extends the syntax highlighting of several **host**
languages in order to highlight **embedded** sub-languages within
strings.

You need to specify which language you are using within the string.
How this is done depends on the host language (see below). Once that
is done you can see and edit the embedded language just like you are
editing a standalone file using that language. For example if you are
editing SQL within a C++ document, the VSCode "Toggle Line Comment"
command will prefix lines with `--` not `//`. Code folding will use
the natural structure of the embedded language block too - collapsing
`<tags>` in an XML string, or `{` braces in a C string


---
## Host Language - C++

C++ uses _raw strings_ to specify the language.

A raw string in C++ looks like
```cpp
auto s = R"foo( ...text )foo";
```

Between the `"` and `(` an arbitrary token can be placed which we use
here to specify the language. This token needs to exist at the end of
the string as well:

![cpp_example.png](images/cpp_example.png)

---
## Host language - Javascript and TypeScript

Javascript and TypeScript template strings delimited by backticks
(e.g. `` `...text...` ``) can be multiline. This extension supports
two different ways to specify the language in a multiline template
string.

As an inline comment before the beginning of the string:
```javascript
const s = /*lang_id*/ `
code goes here
`;
```

Or as a _tagged template_, this style expects there to be a function
with the name of the language which can process the string (see the
[tagged template
documentation](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Template_literals#tagged_templates)
for examples and for an identity template which just returns the input
string)
```javascript
const s = lang_id`
code goes here
`;
```


![js_example.png](images/js_example.png)

---
## Host language - Python

Python multiline strings do not have custom terminators the way C++,
Perl or other languages do. As such, we rely on _leading comments_ to
identify a language. This comment must be immediately after the `'''`
or `"""` which starts a multiline string

![py_example.png](images/py_example.png)


---
## Host language - YAML

YAML has block strings that begin with a `|` or `>` and continue based
on the indentation level of a block of text. Following the start
indicator you can put a comment (this is a *YAML* comment) which
indicates the language

![yaml_example.png](images/yaml_example.png)


---
## Host Language - Rust

Rust strings are all multiline. But for syntax embedding purposes we
use the multiline raw strings that begin with `r#"` (where there are
0-n `#` characters) and end with `"#`

![rust_example.png](images/rust_example.png)

---
## Host Language - Go

All Go strings are multi-line, but this extension uses _raw strings_
for code blocks. These are strings that are surrounded by backticks
and can contain quote and backslash characters without the need for
escaping them (they can not, however, easily contain backticks). These
strings must be prefixed with an inline comment indicating the
language ID

![go_example.png](images/go_example.png)

---
## Host language - Powershell

In Powershell you can use _here-strings_ for the code blocks.
(e.g. `` `@"...text..."@` ``, but it can be multi-line). To specify the language, you use a inline comment before the string:

![powershell_example.png](images/powershell_example.png)

---
## Embedded Languages

This extension supports a large number of embedded languages, listed
below. The "ID" column shows the IDs you can use in host languages
like C++ and YAML where you can specify an ID in the _host_ language.
The "Comment" column is for host languages like Python which have no
way to indicate the embedded language type directly, and shows what
the first characters of the _embedded_ language string needs to be to
signal which language you are using.

| Name                   | ID                           | Comment                                        |
| ---------------------- | ---------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------- |
| ARM assembly           | arm                          | `@arm`,`;arm`                                  |
| Batch                  | bat                          | `REM`, `@REM`, `::bat`                         |
| C                      | c                            | `/*c*/`                                        |
| C++                    | cpp, c++                     | `//cpp`, `//c++`                               |
| CSS                    | css                          | `/*css*/`                                      |
| GLSL                   | glsl                         | `//glsl`                                       |
| GraphQL                | graphql, gql                 | `#graphql`, `#gql`                             |
| Graphviz               | graphviz, dot                | `//graphviz`, `//dot`                          |
| Handlebars             | handlebars, hbs              | `//handlebars`, `//hbs`                        |
| HLSL                   | hlsl                         | `//hlsl`                                       |
| HTML                   | html                         | `<!DOCTYPE`, `<html`, `<!--html`               |
| Ini                    | ini                          | `;ini`                                         |
| Javascript             | js, javascript               | `//js`                                         |
| JSON                   | json                         | [^1]                                           |
| JSONC                  | jsonc                        | `//jsonc`                                      |
| LaTeX                  | latex                        | `%latex`                                       |
| Lua                    | lua                          | `--lua`                                        |
| Makefile               | makefile, make               | `#make`, `#makefile`, `#!/usr/bin/make`        |
| Metal shading language | metal                        | `//metal`                                      |
| Python                 | py, python                   | `#py`                                          |
| Shell                  | sh, bash, shell, shellscript | `#sh`, `#bash`, `#shell`, <br>`#!/bin/sh`, ... |
| SQL                    | sql                          | `--sql`                                        |
| TeX                    | text                         | `%tex`                                         |
| TOML                   | toml                         | `#toml`                                        |
| TypeScript             | typescript, ts               | `//typescript`, `//ts`                         |
| WGSL                   | wgsl                         | `//wgsl`                                       |
| x86 and x64 assembly   | x64, x86_64, x64             | `;x86`, `;x86_64`, `;x64`                      |
| XML                    | xml                          | `<?xml`, `<? xml`, `<!--xml`                   |
| YAML                   | yaml                         | `#yaml`                                        |


[^1]: JSON does not support comments, so there is no way to indicate a
  string is a JSON document within the string.

## Developer Notes

See CONTRIBUTING.md for adding new languages



## Requirements



## Known Issues

* Syntax highlighting can leak past the end of the string when there
are unclosed blocks (for example a `{` without a matching `}`). This
is a limitation of the TextMate grammars that VSCode uses - when an
_embedded_ syntax highlighter scans for the end of a text section it
can scan past the end of the string. [VSCode issue
20488](https://github.com/microsoft/vscode/issues/20488) has a longer
discussion on what is going on.

* Because of this same issue, some languages can't be embedded due to
  how they are defined. For example the most popular `csv` and
  `mermaid` highlighters will continue past the end of the string when
  they are embedded.

## Release Notes

See CHANGELOG.md for full list of changes
